# Zephyr RTOS Guide

- When we create a new task that task is signed the portion of memory in the heap.
- That portion is known as a TCB (Task Control Block) 

## What is Zephyr ?
- Zephyr is an open source Real-Time Operating System ( RTOS ) designed for microcontroller, embedded system, IoT devices.
- It is lightweight, fast, modular and scalable.
- It is not just a library it is complete operating system for embedded device.

<br>

- Why Zephyr is popular :
    - It provides small kernal, real time scheduling, device tree, driver framework, bluetooth and wifi support, multi threading, portability and it is an open source.

<br>

- How Zephyr works ?
    - Step 1: Boot
       - MCU Powers on.

    - Step 2 : Kernal Start
       - Zephyr initialized memory, scheduler, interrupts, drivers

    - Step 3 : Hardware initialized
       - Using devicetree drivers

    - Step 4 : Threads Start Running
       - Scheduler runs tasks based on priority.

## What is Mutex ?
- A mutex is a locking mechanism that allows only one task to access a resource at a time.
- Mutex working flow
``` bash
Task A requests mutex
       ↓
Mutex available
       ↓
Task A gets mutex
       ↓
Other tasks blocked
       ↓
Task A finishes work
       ↓
Task A releases mutex
       ↓
Next waiting task gets mutex
```
- The mutex has a ownership meaning the task that locks the mutex must unlock the mutex other tasks cannot release it.
- Where mutex used : 
    - Shared Variable
    - LCD
    - File system
    - Communication buffers
    - Memory regions

- if the mutex is locked by the low priority task and then high priority task comes and its needed to the mutex lock but it is stil wait for the unlock mutex because of mutex has a ownership and mutex lock owner only unlock the mutex so new high priority task still waiting.
- And then priority inversion comes to the picture CPU see that the high priority task is waiting so CPU boost the low priority task and make it complete so the CPU takes the high priority task.

## What is Semaphore ?
- A Semaphore is a synchronization mechanism used to cordinates tasks, control resource access, manage signaling between tasks.
- It works using a counter variable the counter represents available resources or signals.
- Example:
    - Imagine that the parking area with 5 parking slots
    - If all slots are occupied then new car must wait.
    - If one car leave another car can enter
    - Semaphore same works like this

- If semaphore counter is 0 and then the high priority task comes then the new high priority task still waiting for the space into the semaphors it is not happens the high priority task complete first and then low priority.

## What is a Timer ?
- A timer is a mechanism used to measure time and trigger actions after a certain duration.
- There are a two types of timer available:
    - Hardware Timer
    - Software Timer

1. Software Timer: 
    - A software timer is a timer created and managed by software instead of dedicated hardware.
    - It uses RTOS kernal, system tick, scheduler to track the time.
    - Software timer are used to 
       - execute task after delay
       - run periodic operation
       - detect timeout condition
       - avoid blocking delay
    
    - When the timer expires then call the callback function.
    - There are a two types of timer available
       - One-Shot Timer : Execute once and stop
       - Auto-Reload Timer : Restart automatically and acting as a periodic timer.

## What is an Interrupts ? 
- An interrupt is a signal that temporarily stops normal CPU execution to handle an important event.
- After handling the event, CPU returns back to previous execution.
- There are two types of interrupts available

       1. Hardware interrupts
       2. Software interrupts
1. Hardware Interrupt: 
    - A hardware interrupts is generated by external hardware or internal peripherals.
    - Like
       - Button Press
       - UART Receive
       - Timer Overflow
       - ADC Completion
       - GPIO Event

## What is Polling ?
- If CPU continuously checks any process happens in CPU this is called the polling.
- In polling CPU continuously check the CPu updates so the power cosumption is very high in polling.

## What is Deadlock ?
- Deadlock is a condition where two or more tasks wait forever for resource held by each other.
- As a result no task can continue, system becomes stuck.
- Example 
       
       - Task A hold Resource 1
       - Task B hold Resource 2
       - Now
       - Task A needs Resource 2
       - Task B needs Resource 1

- In deadlock task has permanent waiting, circular dependency task depends on each other, Resource ownership conflict resource already occupied.
- Types of deadlock :

       1. Resource Deadlock
       2. Communication Deadlock
              - Task wait for a message / signals forever
       3. Lock Deadlock
              - Occures with: Mutex, Semaphore, Spinlock

## What is Starvation ?
- Starvation occurs when a task waits indefinitely because other tasks continuusly get resouces first.
- Task is not permanently blocked, but practically never executes.
- Example of starvation :
       - The High priority task continuously execute and low task never gets CPU.
       - So the Low task is a starves.

## What is Priority Inversion ? 
- A Priority Inversion occurs when a high priority task gets blocked by a low-priority task while a  medium priority task indirectly delays the low priority task.
- As a result high priority task waits unexpectelly long.
- Step by step priority inversion
       
       Low priority tasks lock mutex
                     ↓
       High priority task becomes READY
                     ↓
       Scheduler immediately switches to high task
                     ↓
       High task tries to lock same mutex
                     ↓
       Mutex already blocked by low task
                     ↓
       High task becomes blocked waiting for mutex
                     ↓
       Medium Priority task becomes READY
                     ↓
       Scheduler compare HIGH: Blocked, MEDIUM: Ready, LOW: Ready
                     ↓
       So Scheduler runs medium task
                     ↓
       Low task not runnung mutex not released
                     ↓
       High task still blockes and waiting fopr mutex

- Priority inheritance :
    - When high priority task waits for mutex low priority owner temporarily inherits higher priority.
    - Suppose Low has priority 1, Medium has 2, and High has 3 then after inherite low task priority is 3 temporarily
    - Now low task exexutes immediately and medium task can't interrupt.
    - Now low task quickly finishes work release mutex then high task wakes gets mutex.

## What is a Core ?
- A core is an independent processing unit inside a CPU.
- A Single core can fetch instructions, execute instruction, and process data it behaves like a small CPU.

## What is a Multicore System ?
- A multicore system is a processor containing multiple CPU cores inside a single chip.
- Each core can execute tasks independently.

<br/>
<h1>CMAKE</h1>

## What is CMake in Zephyr ?
- CMake is the build system used by zephyr its job is
    - Compile code
    - Link Libraries
    - Generate Binaries
    - Handle Source Files
    - Manage modules/drivers
    - Configure compiler flags

- This file describes:
    - Which source file exist
    - Which libraries are needed
    - Include directories
    - Compiler Settings
    - Executable Name
    - Dependencies

- Zephyr officially uses CMake + Ninja for builds.
- CMake is a build system generator.
- CMake does not directly compile our code instead CMake creates build files for another build tool such as:
    - Ninja
    - Make
    - Visual Studio
    - XCode
- Then this tools actual compile the project.

## Why CMake ?
- Different platforms used different build systems so developer had to maintain separate project files for different devices.
- So CMake solve this we write only one configuration

       CMakeLists.txt

- Then CMake generates platform specific build files

## How CMake reads this files ?
- Check CMake Version
- Create Project
- Detect Compiler
- Create target "app"
- Add main.c into target
- Generate build files 

- Understand add_executable

       add_executable(app main.c)

- Meaning 

       Create executable target named "app"
       using source file "main.c"

## What is kconfig ?
- Kconfig is the configuration system used by the zephyr RTOS to manage software feature and build-time options.
- Its originally developed for the linux kernel, it allows you to enable, or disable, or parameterize specific libraries, drivers, and kernel features without changing any source code.
- Simple meaning of kernel is what to enable
- Kconfig is a system used to choose which feature or options should be included when building software.
- Why its exists:
    - There are a huge RTOS like zephyr it contains BLE, WIFI, UART, SPI, GPIO etc.
    - If all feature compiles every times so binary becomes huge, RAM uses increase, flash uses increase, build becomes slower
    - So kconfig allows enables only required feature.

- Kconfig works using symbols there symbols type in below

<br>

| Type   | Example     |
|:------:|:-----------:|
| bool   | y/n         |
| int    | number      |
| hex    | hexadecimal |
| string | text        |

```bash
Example of kconfig

config UART
    bool "Enable UART"

CONFIG_GPIO=y
CONFIG_SPI=n

config STACK_SIZE
    int "Thread stack size"
    default 1024

config DEVICE_NAME
    string "Device name"
    default "sensor"

config FLASH_ADDRESS
    hex "Flash address"
    default 0x08000000
```

## Important Config File

| File           | Purpose                |
|:--------------:|:----------------------:|
| kconfig        | Define Symbols         |
| prj.conf       | Set Symbole Values     |
| .config        | Final Generated Config |
| kconfig.zephyr | Main Zephyr kconfig    |

## What is prj.conf file ?
- This is a user configuration file.
- Example

       CONFIG_GPIO=y
       CONFIG_SERIAL=y
       CONFIG_CONSOLE=y
- This tells zephyr:

       Enable GPIO
       Enable serial driver
       Enable console

## What is .config ?
- It is generated automatically.
- Its contained final resolved configuration usually we does not edit it manually.

## Dependencies
- Kconfig supports dependencies.
- Example

       config UART_CONSOLE
       bool "UART Console"
       depends on UART

- Meaning

       UART console requires UART

- If UART disable

       UART_CONSOLE cannot enable

## Select
- Example

       config APP_FEATURE
       bool "My Feature"
       select GPIO

- Meaning

       If APP_FEATURE enabled
       ↓
       Automatically enable GPIO

## Default
- Example

       config BUFFER_SIZE
       int
       default 256

- If user does not specify

       BUFFER_SIZE = 256

## Menu Structure
- Config supports menus
- Example

       menu "Drivers"

       config UART
              bool "UART Support"

       config SPI
              bool "SPI Support"

       endmenu

- Creates grouped configuration menus.

## Example of creates config files 
- Kconfig File

       menu "My App"

       config APP_LED
              bool "Enable LED"

       config APP_DELAY
              int "Blink Delay"
              default 500

       endmenu

- prj.conf file

       CONFIG_APP_LED=y
       CONFIG_APP_DELAY=1000

- Access in C

       printf("%d", CONFIG_APP_DELAY);

## What is DeviceTree ?
- Device tree is a hardware map for the OS or RTOS.
- It tells the OS
    - What hardware exits
    - Where devices are connected
    - Which pins are used
    - Interrupts Number
    - Memory Addresses
    - SPI/I2C buses
    - Clocks
    - GPIO pins
- A devcie tree is just a text file that describes the hardware of an embedded board.
- DeviceTree File use a .dts (device tree source) extention.

## Why DeviceTree Exits ?
- Imagine that GPIO pins, UART, SPI, LEDs and etc are a different on a different board.
- Without devicetree driver source code must change for every board, that becomes impossible.
- So devicetree separates hardware description from driver code.
- This think like this

| Component  | Real Meaning |
|:----------:|:------------:|
| Driver     | Worker       |
| DeviceTree | Hardware Map |
| OS         | Manager      |

- Driver ask devicetree 
    - Which UART should i used ?
    - Which GPIO pin ?
    - Which SPI bus ?

## Important DeviceTree Files
| File                   | Purpose      |
|:----------------------:|:------------:|
| .dts                   | Worker       |
| .dtsi                  | Hardware Map |
| .overlay               | Manager      |
| devicetree_generated.h | Manager      |

1. .dts
    - Main board description
    - It contains UART, GPIO, SPI, LEDs, Clocks

2. .dtsi
    - Shared include file
    - Used for reusable SoC ( System on Chip ) descriptions.

2. .overlay
    - Very Important for application
    - Used to modify board hardware description WITHOUT editing original board file

## Why overlay exits ?
- Never modify original board DTS directly.
- Instead:

       Board DTS
       +
       Application Overlay
       =
       Final Devicetree

## Nodes in DeviceTree
- DeviceTree Contains Node.
- Root node define as a /
- Example

       uart0 {
         current-speed = <115200>;
       };

- Here uart0 is node.
- Here current-speed = <115200> is a property.
- Labels:

       led0: led_0 {

    - Here led0 is label used for referencing nodes.

- References:

       gpios = <&gpio0 13 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;

    - Meaning:

    | Parts            | Meaning         |
    |:----------------:|:---------------:|
    | &gpio0           | GPIO Controller |
    | 13               | Pin Number      |
    | GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH | Active State    |

- Aliases:
    - It is used for creates friendly names instead of full path.
    - In this example used led0 instead of full led name
```bash
       aliases {
              led0 = &green_led;
       };
```

## How DeviceTree work internally ?
- Suppose

       &uart0 {
         current-speed = <115200>;
       };

- Internally


       Devicetree compiler processes DTS
       ↓
       Generates C macros
       ↓
       Zephyr drivers read macros
       ↓
       UART configured automatically

## Relationship between everything between kconfig, DeviceTree, CMake, Compiler
- Example

       Kconfig
       ↓
       Enable driver support

       Devicetree
       ↓
       Describe hardware

       CMake
       ↓
       Build source files

       Compiler
       ↓
       Generate firmware

## What are DeviceTree Bindings ?
- Bindings define the rules for DeviceTree nodes.
- They tell Zephyr:
    - What properties are allowed
    - What properties are required
    - What types they have
- Example
    - Suppose DeviceTree node is a form filled by the user.
    - Then binding is instructions for how to fill form.

- Why bindings Exits ?
   - Without bindings:
       - Property names inconsistent
       - Drivers cannot validate data
       - Imposible to know valid syntex
       - Error dificult to detect.

- Relation

       Devicetree Node
              ↓
       Validated using Binding
              ↓
       Driver reads validated properties

### 1. Example in code:

       my_sensor: sensor@10 {
              compatible = "company,my-sensor";
              reg = <0X10>;
              irg-gpios = <&gpio0 5 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;
       };
       This node needs a binding.

- Bindings usually use .yaml
- Example 
    - company,my-sensor.yaml
- The connection happen through compatible.
- Example: 
    - If compatible = "company,my-sensor" then zephyr search company,my-sensor.yaml binding file.

- Binding file Structure

       description: My custom sensor

       compatible: "company,my-sensor"

       properties:
           reg:
              type: int
              required: true

       irq-gpios:
           type: phandle-array
           required: true

- Understanding
    1. description:
       - Humnan-readable explanation.
    2. compatible:
       - Most important field
       - Matches DTS node.
       - Connects hardware and driver
    3. properties:
       - Defines allowed node properties.
    4. type:
       - Defines property types.
    5. required:
       - Whather property must exits.

- Supported Property types

| Type          | Meaning                | Example                           |
|:-------------:|:----------------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| int           | integer                | my-int = <1>;                     |
| string        | text                   | my-string = "Hello"               |
| boolean       | true/false             | enable-my-feature                 |
| array         | list                   | my-inst = <0x10 1234 0>;          |
| phandle       | node reference         | my-uart = <&uart0>;               |
| phandle-array | references + arguments | io-channels = <&abc 0>, <&abc 1>; |


## What is phandle ?
- A phandle is a reference to another node
- Example

       gpios = <&gpio0 5 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>

- Here &gpio0 is a phandle reference.

## What is phandle-array ?
- It is most comman in GPIO/SPI/I2C

       irq-gpios = <&gpio0 5 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;

- This is known as a array it contains &gpio0: reference code, 5: pin, GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH: flags.

## Comman Binding Properties

| Property   | Meaning          |
|:----------:|:----------------:|
| Compatible | Device Type      |
| reg        | Register Address |
| interrupts | Interrupt Info   |
| gpios      | GPIO References  |
| labels     | Device Label     |
| status     | Enable/Disable   |

- reg:
    - Hardware Register address
    - reg = <0X40002000 0X1000>;
    - Here first is base address and second one is size

## Demo of bindings work internally

       Zephyr searches binding YAML
              ↓
       validates properties
              ↓
       generates Devicetree macros
              ↓
       driver accesses macros

## Important devicetree macros

| Macros          | Purpose          |
|:---------------:|:----------------:|
| DT_NODELABEL()  | Get Node         |
| DT_ALIAS()      | Get Alias        |
| DT_PROP()       | Get Property     |
| DT_REG_ADDR()   | Register Address |
| DT_GPIO_PIN     | GPIO Pin         |
| DT_GPIO_FLAGS() | GPIO flags       |

## Real GPIO Binding Example
- DTS (Device Tree Source) file

       led0 {
              gpios = <&gpio0 13 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>
       }

- Binding File

       properties: 
              gpios: 
                     type: phandle-array
                     required: true

- Driver

       DT_GPIO_PIN(node, gpios)

- Ans:

       13

## Custom Binding Creation
- File Structure

       my_driver/
       ├── my_driver.c
       ├── Kconfig
       ├── CMakeLists.txt
       └── dts/
              └── bindings/
                     └── company,my-device.yaml

- Custom binding .yaml

       description: Custom LED Driver

       compatible: "company,my-led"

       properties:
          gpios:
             type: phandle-array
             required: true

          blink-delay:
             type: int
             default: 500

- DeviceTree Node

       myled0: my_led {
           compatible = "company,my-led";
           gpios = <&gpio0 13 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;
           blink-delay = <1000>;
       };

- Driver Access

       #define MY_NODE DT_NODELABEL(myled0)
       #define BLINK_DELAY DT_PROP(MY_NODE, blink_delay)

- Binding creates the contract between hardware description and driver software.

## Full System Flow

       Kconfig
       ↓
       Enable driver

       Binding YAML
       ↓
       Defines schema

       Devicetree
       ↓
       Provides hardware data

       DTC + Zephyr scripts
       ↓
       Generate macros

       Driver
       ↓
       Uses macros

       Firmware
       ↓
       Controls hardware

## What is a Device Driver ?
- A device driver is software that controls hardware.
- Application code can't directly understand hardware register so the driver acts like a bridge.

       Application
       ↓
       Driver
       ↓
       Hardware Registers
       ↓
       Peripheral

- A driver usually contains 
    - Configuration
    - Initialization
    - Hardware register access
    - APIs/Fucntions
    - Interrupt handling
    - DeviceTree integration

- A Driver flow is

       Application calls gpio_pin_set()
       ↓
       GPIO driver executes
       ↓
       Writes hardware register
       ↓
       Pin voltage changes
       ↓
       LED turns ON

- Zephyr Driver Model uses

       Kconfig
       ↓
       Enable driver

       Binding YAML
       ↓
       Define hardware schema

       Devicetree
       ↓
       Provide hardware data

       Driver
       ↓
       Read hardware info

       Application
       ↓
       Use driver API

- https://chatgpt.com/share/6a292ace-e488-83ec-9b3d-d1c4b800a247
